What is the Web? (How the Internet and Websites Work)
Topic 1
What is the Web? & (How the Internet and Websites Work)
Discover how the Internet connects billions of devices worldwide, and how the Web lets you visit websites through a browser. Learn the difference between the two, how browsers work, and what happens every time you open a web page.

Every day you use the Internet to watch videos, chat with friends, search for answers, and play games. But have you ever stopped to wonder: how does it actually work?

In this lesson, you will explore the foundation of everything you see on a screen — from how computers talk to each other, to how your browser displays a web page in seconds.

💡
What You Will Learn
By the end of this topic, you will understand what the Internet is, how the Web works, the difference between a website and a web page, what browsers do, and what happens behind the scenes every time you open a link.

In this lesson, you will learn how to:

Explain what the Internet is and how it connects devices
Describe the Web and how it is different from the Internet
Tell the difference between a website and a web page
Explain what a browser does and name some popular browsers
Describe the client-server relationship in simple terms
Walk through the step-by-step process of loading a website
The Internet is a massive global network that connects billions of devices — computers, phones, tablets, smart TVs, and more — all around the world. Think of it like a gigantic system of roads, but instead of cars, data travels through it.

🏙️
Real-World Analogy
Imagine every house in the world is a computer. The roads connecting all those houses are the Internet. When you send a message to a friend, it travels through these "roads" to reach their house.

How Computers Communicate
When two devices want to share information, they must follow a set of rules called protocols. These rules make sure data is broken into small pieces called packets, sent across the network, and then reassembled correctly at the destination.

Concept — Data Packet Journey
Your Device
    │
    ▼
[ Data is split into small packets ]
    │
    ▼
[ Packets travel across routers on the Internet ]
    │
    ▼
[ Packets are reassembled at the destination ]
    │
    ▼
Destination Device receives complete message
Simulation — Message sent from Cairo to London
Network Packet Simulation
// You send: "Hello from Cairo!"
Packet 1 → "Hello " → Router Egypt → Router Europe → London ✓
Packet 2 → "from C" → Router Egypt → Router Europe → London ✓
Packet 3 → "airo!" → Router Egypt → Router Europe → London ✓

✓ Message reassembled: "Hello from Cairo!"
// Travel time: ~50 milliseconds
Key Facts About the Internet
Feature	Description
Global Network	Connects billions of devices across every country in the world
Physical Infrastructure	Made of cables (including undersea cables), satellites, and wireless signals
Data Transfer	Information travels as digital packets at extremely high speeds
Always On	The Internet runs 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, non-stop
Decentralized	No single company or country fully controls the Internet
📘
Advanced Note
The detailed rules for how data is formatted and transmitted across the Internet are called
TCP/IP protocols
. These will be explained in detail in a future advanced lesson.

The Web (short for World Wide Web) is a system that runs on top of the Internet. It is the part of the Internet that lets you visit websites through a browser. Think of the Internet as the highway, and the Web as all the shops, homes, and places you visit along that highway.

💡
Internet vs The Web — Key Difference
The Internet is the
infrastructure
(the wires and connections). The Web is a
service
that uses the Internet. Email, online games, and video calls also use the Internet — but they are not the Web. The Web only refers to websites accessed through a browser.

Internet vs Web — Side by Side
Feature	Internet	The Web
What it is	The global network of connected devices	A system of websites you access via browser
Created	1960s (ARPANET)	1991 (by Tim Berners-Lee)
Examples	Email, gaming servers, video calls	Google.com, YouTube.com, Wikipedia.org
Accessed by	Any internet-connected app or service	A web browser (Chrome, Edge, Firefox)
Required?	Yes — needed for the Web to work	No — the Internet works without the Web
🎯
Simple Way to Remember
All Web activity uses the Internet. But not all Internet activity is the Web. When you use WhatsApp, you use the Internet — but you are not using the Web. When you open YouTube in a browser, you use both the Internet AND the Web.

These two words are often confused, but they mean different things. A web page is a single document you see in your browser — like one article or one video page. A website is a collection of many web pages that belong to the same address.

📚
Book Analogy
If a website is a
book
, then each web page is a
page inside that book
. Wikipedia is the website. The article about "Egypt" is one web page inside it.

Examples from Daily Life
Website	Example Web Page Inside It
youtube.com	A single video watch page
wikipedia.org	The article about the Eiffel Tower
google.com	The search results page for "cats"
bbc.com	A single news article
amazon.com	The product page for a specific item
Concept — Website Structure
youtube.com  ← This is the WEBSITE
│
├── youtube.com/               ← Home Page (one web page)
├── youtube.com/watch?v=abc    ← Video Page (one web page)
├── youtube.com/results?q=cat  ← Search Results Page
└── youtube.com/channel/xyz    ← Channel Page
youtube.com/watch?v=abc
Browser View Simulation
Website: youtube.com
Current Page: Watch Page — "How to make pasta"
Other Pages Available: 1,000,000+ pages on this same website

// You are viewing ONE web page inside a HUGE website
A browser is a program that lets you visit websites. It reads the code that makes up a web page and turns it into the colorful, clickable page you see on your screen. Without a browser, web pages would just look like raw, unreadable text files.

Popular Browsers
Browser	Made By	Symbol
Chrome	Google	🟡🔵🔴🟢 colored circle
Edge	Microsoft	Blue wave
Firefox	Mozilla	Orange fox around globe
Safari	Apple	Compass icon
Opera	Opera Software	Red O icon
What a Browser Does Step by Step
Process — How a Browser Works
1. You type a website address (URL) in the address bar
2. The browser sends a request to the server for that page
3. The server sends back the web page files (HTML, CSS, JS)
4. The browser reads the HTML — the structure of the page
5. The browser reads the CSS — the colors and design
6. The browser reads the JS — the interactive parts
7. The browser displays the fully built page on your screen
Browser rendering simulation
Chrome — Page Load Process
Step 1 → Address bar: wikipedia.org
Step 2 → Request sent to Wikipedia server
Step 3 → Server responds with files
Step 4 → HTML parsed → page structure built
Step 5 → CSS applied → colors and layout added
Step 6 → JavaScript executed → interactive elements ready
Step 7 → Page displayed to you! ✓
// Total time: ~0.8 seconds
💡
Browsers Are Translators
A browser's main job is to translate code (HTML, CSS, JavaScript) into a visual page that humans can understand and interact with. This process is called
rendering
.

Every time you visit a website, two "players" are involved: the client and the server. Understanding this relationship is one of the most important ideas in web development.

🍕
Restaurant Analogy
Think of a restaurant.
You
are the customer (client) — you place an order. The
kitchen
is the server — it prepares and sends back your food. The
waiter
is the network carrying requests and responses between you.

Client and Server Defined
Role	Who/What	What It Does
Client	Your browser (Chrome, Edge, etc.)	Sends requests — asks for a web page
Server	A powerful computer owned by the website	Receives requests and sends back the web page files
Network	The Internet	Carries the request and response between client and server
Concept — Request and Response Flow
CLIENT (Your Browser)                   SERVER (Website's Computer)
        │                                          │
        │── REQUEST ──────────────────────────────▶│
        │   "Please send me google.com"            │
        │                                          │
        │◀── RESPONSE ─────────────────────────────│
        │    Here are the files for google.com     │
        │                                          │
[Browser displays the page]
Client-Server communication simulation
Network Log
CLIENT → GET https://google.com
// Client sends a request to the Google server

SERVER → 200 OK
// Server replies: "Found it! Here are the files."

✓ Files received by browser
✓ Page rendered successfully
📘
Status Codes
The number 200 OK is a status code meaning "success." You have probably seen 404 — that means the page was not found on the server. Status codes will be explained in detail in a future advanced lesson.

Let's put everything together. Here is exactly what happens — step by step — from the moment you decide to visit a website to the moment you see it on your screen.

Step-by-Step: Opening "wikipedia.org"
Step 1 — You type the address
▼
Step 2 — Your browser prepares a request
▼
Step 3 — Request travels through the Internet
▼
Step 4 — Wikipedia's server receives the request
▼
Step 5 — Server sends back the web page files
▼
Step 6 — Your browser reads and renders the page
▼
Step 7 — You see Wikipedia on your screen!
Full Flow — Detailed View
You type: wikipedia.org
          │
          ▼
Browser asks DNS: "What is the IP address of wikipedia.org?"
          │
          ▼
DNS replies: "91.198.174.192"
          │
          ▼
Browser sends HTTP request to that IP address
          │
          ▼
Wikipedia server receives request
          │
          ▼
Server sends back: HTML + CSS + JavaScript files
          │
          ▼
Browser renders (builds) the visual page
          │
          ▼
Wikipedia appears on your screen ✓
Simulated browser load log — wikipedia.org
Full Page Load Simulation
0ms → DNS lookup: wikipedia.org
12ms → DNS resolved → IP: 91.198.174.192
15ms → TCP connection established
20ms → HTTP GET request sent
110ms → Server responded: 200 OK
115ms → HTML file received — parsing begins
200ms → CSS files loaded — styling applied
280ms → JavaScript loaded — page interactive
310ms → ✓ Page fully loaded and displayed!
📘
What is DNS?
DNS (Domain Name System) works like a phone book for the Internet. It converts website names like "wikipedia.org" into numbers (IP addresses) that computers use to find each other. DNS will be explained in detail in a future advanced lesson.

🎯
Key Takeaway
Every time you open a website, your browser (client) sends a request through the Internet to a server. The server sends back files. Your browser reads those files and turns them into the page you see. This request-response cycle happens in less than a second — and it is the foundation of everything on the Web.

Term	Definition
Internet	The global network connecting billions of devices worldwide through cables, satellites, and wireless signals.
Web (World Wide Web)	A system of websites and web pages accessible through a browser, running on top of the Internet.
Website	A collection of related web pages that belong to the same address (like youtube.com).
Web Page	A single document displayed in a browser — one screen of content within a website.
Browser	A program (like Chrome or Edge) that reads web page code and displays it visually on your screen.
Client	Your browser — the device or program that sends a request to a server asking for a web page.
Server	A powerful computer that stores website files and sends them to clients when they make a request.
Request	A message sent by the browser to the server asking for a web page or resource.
Response	The server's reply to a request — containing the files needed to build the web page.
Rendering	The process by which a browser turns HTML, CSS, and JavaScript code into a visible, usable web page.
Packet	A small piece of data. Large messages are broken into packets to travel across the Internet efficiently.
Protocol	A set of rules that devices follow when communicating with each other across a network.
DNS	Domain Name System — converts website names into IP addresses that computers use to find each other.
IP Address	A unique number assigned to every device on the Internet — like a home address for computers.
Internet & Web
Internet
→ Global network of connected devices
→ Physical infrastructure: cables, satellites, wireless
→ Data travels as small packets
→ No single owner or controller
The Web
→ A service that runs on top of the Internet
→ Accessed through a web browser
→ Made of websites and web pages
→ Created in 1991 by Tim Berners-Lee
Website vs Page
→ Website = collection of many web pages (youtube.com)
→ Web page = one single document in a browser
→ A website can have thousands of pages
→ Each page has its own URL
Browser
→ Translates code into visual pages (rendering)
→ Examples: Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari
→ Sends requests, receives responses
→ Reads HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
Client
→ Your browser or device
→ Sends requests to servers
→ Receives and displays responses
→ You are the "client" when browsing
Server
→ Powerful computer storing website files
→ Listens for incoming requests
→ Sends back the correct files
→ Replies with status codes (200 = OK, 404 = not found)
Web Flow
→ You type URL → Browser sends request
→ DNS converts name to IP address
→ Server receives and responds
→ Browser renders the page → You see it!




What is a Website Made Of?
Topic 2 — Lesson 2
What is a Website Made Of?
Understand what a URL really is, how HTTP requests and responses work, what files make up a website, the difference between static and dynamic websites, and how to inspect any website with browser developer tools.

In Topic 1, you learned what the Internet and the Web are, how browsers work, and the basic idea of clients and servers. Now it is time to go one level deeper and understand exactly how everything connects.

In this lesson, you will explore the mechanics of the Web: what a URL actually contains, how requests and responses travel between browsers and servers, what files websites are made of, and how you can actually peek inside any website using developer tools built right into your browser.

💡
Why This Matters
Every web developer needs to understand this layer. When your website does not load, you will use these concepts to find out why. When you write your first lines of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, you will understand exactly which file does what — and why they are all needed.

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

Read and explain each part of a URL
Understand what HTTP requests and responses are
Describe the sequence of events when a website loads
Explain what HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files each do
Tell the difference between static and dynamic websites
Open and navigate browser developer tools
Every page on the Web has a unique address called a URL — Uniform Resource Locator. Think of it as the exact address of a specific page on the Internet, just like a street address for a house.

📮
Real-Life Analogy
A URL is like a full postal address. The
protocol
is like the type of mail service (standard or express). The
domain
is the street and building name. The
path
is the specific flat or room number inside that building.

Breaking Down a URL
https://
www.wikipedia.org
/wiki
/Internet
?lang=en
Protocol (https://)
Domain (www.wikipedia.org)
Directory (/wiki)
Page name (/Internet)
Query string (?lang=en)
Part	Example	What It Means
Protocol	https://	The rules used to transfer data. HTTPS = secure. HTTP = not secure.
Subdomain	www.	A section of the main domain. "www" is the most common but not required.
Domain	wikipedia.org	A unique name registered for a website or organization
Top-Level Domain	.org	The ending of the domain. .com = commercial, .org = organization, .edu = education.
Path	/wiki/Internet	The specific location of a page or file on the server, like folders on a computer.
Query String	?lang=en	Extra parameters sent to the server. Starts with ? and uses key=value pairs.
More URL Examples
URL Examples — Real Websites
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ
  ↑ protocol  ↑ domain     ↑ path  ↑ query: video ID

https://www.google.com/search?q=what+is+html
  ↑ protocol  ↑ domain  ↑ path ↑ query: search term

https://docs.github.com/en/get-started
  ↑ protocol ↑ subdomain ↑ domain ↑ path
Browser address bar — URL breakdown
URL Analysis — Simulated Browser Parsing
// URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ

Protocol : https → secure connection ✓
Subdomain : www
Domain : youtube.com
Path : /watch
Query : v=dQw4w9WgXcQ → video ID parameter

✓ Valid URL — browser will send request to youtube.com
📘
Advanced: Ports and Fragments
URLs can also include a
port number
(like :8080) and a
fragment
(like #section-name to jump to a specific part of a page). These will be covered in a future advanced lesson on URL structure and web servers.

Every time your browser loads a web page, it sends an HTTP request to the server. The server then sends back an HTTP response. This is the core communication system of the Web.

HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It is the agreed language that browsers and servers use to talk to each other. The secure version, HTTPS, encrypts the conversation so no one can spy on it.

What is an HTTP Request?
A request is a message your browser sends to a server. It includes:

The method — what type of action you want (GET = fetch a page, POST = send data)
The URL — which page or resource you want
The headers — extra information like your browser type and language preference
HTTP Request — What Your Browser Sends
GET /index.html HTTP/2
Host: www.example.com
Accept: text/html
Accept-Language: en-US
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Chrome)
HTTP Request — Simulated Output
Browser → Server: Request Details
METHOD : GET → "Please send me this page"
URL : /index.html
Protocol : HTTP/2
Host : www.example.com
Browser : Chrome on Windows

→ Request sent. Waiting for server response...
What is an HTTP Response?
After the server receives a request, it sends back a response. This includes:

A status code — a number telling you what happened (200 = success, 404 = not found)
Headers — information about the response (file type, size, etc.)
The body — the actual content: the HTML file, image, or other resource requested
HTTP Response — What the Server Sends Back
HTTP/2 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 4523

<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head><title>Example Page</title></head>
  <body><h1>Hello!</h1></body>
</html>
HTTP Response — Simulated Output
Server → Browser: Response Details
Status : 200 OK → Success! Page found and sending...
Content-Type: text/html → This is an HTML file
Content-Size: 4523 bytes
Body : <!DOCTYPE html>...</html>

✓ Response received — browser will now render the page
Common HTTP Status Codes
Code	Name	What It Means	Example
200	OK	Everything worked. Page found and sent.	Normal page load
301	Moved Permanently	The page has moved to a new URL.	Website changed its address
404	Not Found	The page does not exist on the server.	Typing the wrong URL
500	Internal Server Error	Something went wrong on the server side.	Server has a bug or crash
💡
You Have Seen 404 Before
When you click a broken link and see a "Page Not Found" message, that is the browser telling you it received a
404 response
from the server. The server is saying: "I received your request, but the page you asked for does not exist here."

When you type a URL and press Enter, a precise sequence of events takes place. Let's walk through every step using a real example — opening https://www.wikipedia.org.

Full Website Loading Sequence
① Type URL
User types https://www.wikipedia.org and presses Enter
▼
② DNS Lookup
Browser asks DNS: "What is the IP address of wikipedia.org?"
▼
③ DNS Reply
DNS returns: "wikipedia.org = 185.15.58.224"
▼
④ TCP Connection
Browser connects to Wikipedia's server at that IP address
▼
⑤ HTTP Request
Browser sends: GET / HTTP/2 to wikipedia.org
▼
⑥ HTTP Response
Server sends back: 200 OK + HTML file
▼
⑦ Parse HTML
Browser reads the HTML and finds links to CSS and JavaScript files
▼
⑧ Load Resources
Browser sends more requests to download CSS, JS, images
▼
⑨ Render Page
Browser combines all files and draws the final visual page on screen
Browser Network Timeline — Simulated
Network Log — Opening wikipedia.org
[0ms] DNS lookup: wikipedia.org
[12ms] DNS resolved → 185.15.58.224
[15ms] TCP connection established
[18ms] GET / HTTP/2 → server
[120ms] 200 OK — HTML received (68 KB)
[122ms] GET /styles.css
[135ms] 200 OK — CSS received (180 KB)
[136ms] GET /main.js
[190ms] 200 OK — JS received (420 KB)
[195ms] GET /logo.png, GET /banner.jpg (images)
[380ms] ✓ All resources loaded — page rendering complete
⚡
All of this happens in milliseconds
A typical web page loads in 0.5 to 3 seconds — but during that time, the browser may make 50 to 100 separate requests for different files (HTML, CSS, JS, images, fonts). Modern browsers are very efficient and download many files at the same time.

Every website you visit is made from files stored on a server. The main technologies used to build modern websites are: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

📄
HTML
HyperText Markup Language — the structure and content of the page. Headings, paragraphs, images, links.
🎨
CSS
Cascading Style Sheets — the design and appearance. Colours, fonts, layout, spacing, animations.
⚡
JavaScript
The behaviour and interactivity. Buttons that do things, pop-ups, forms, live updates.
🏠
Real-Life Analogy — Building a House
HTML
is like the walls, floors, and rooms — the structure.
CSS
is like the paint, furniture, and decoration — the appearance.
JavaScript
is like the electricity — it makes things work: lights turn on, doors open, appliances run.

HTML — Structure
HTML uses tags to define different parts of a page. Each tag has an opening and a closing version, and they describe what kind of content is inside.

HTML — Basic Structure Example
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>My Page</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello, World!</h1>
    <p>This is my first web page.</p>
    <a href="https://google.com">Visit Google</a>
  </body>
</html>
Browser Output — What the HTML Looks Like
Hello, World!

This is my first web page.

Visit Google
↑ This is how the browser renders the HTML code above — plain structure, no styling yet.

CSS — Appearance
CSS adds colour, fonts, spacing, and layout to the HTML structure. Without CSS, every website would look like a plain text document.

CSS — Styling the HTML Above
h1 {
  color: #c2410c;
  font-size: 2rem;
  font-family: sans-serif;
}

p {
  color: #3d1a00;
  font-size: 1rem;
  line-height: 1.7;
}

a {
  color: #1d4ed8;
  font-weight: bold;
}
Browser Output — Same HTML, Now with CSS Applied
Hello, World!

This is my first web page.

Visit Google
↑ Same HTML content, but CSS has added colour, size, and font styling.

JavaScript — Behaviour
JavaScript adds interactivity. It can respond to clicks, show and hide content, validate forms, update parts of the page without reloading, and much more.

JavaScript — Making a Button Interactive
<button id="greetBtn">Click Me!</button>
<p id="message"></p>

<script>
  document.getElementById("greetBtn").addEventListener("click", function() {
    document.getElementById("message").textContent = "Hello! You clicked the button.";
  });
</script>
Browser Output — Interactive Button (click it!)
Click Me!
↑ This is live JavaScript running in your browser right now. Click the button!

File Type	Extension	Role	Without It
HTML	.html	Structure and content of the page	No content visible at all
CSS	.css	Visual design, layout, and styling	Plain unstyled text only
JavaScript	.js	Interactivity and dynamic behaviour	Static, non-interactive page
Not all websites work the same way. Some websites always show the exact same content to every visitor. Others change their content based on who is visiting, what they clicked, or what time it is. This is the difference between static and dynamic websites.

📄 Static Website
The files on the server are fixed and do not change
Every visitor sees the same content
Built with only HTML and CSS (and sometimes a little JS)
Fast to load, simple to build
Good for portfolios, simple info pages
⚡ Dynamic Website
The server generates pages on the fly based on data
Different visitors see personalised content
Uses databases, server-side code, and APIs
More complex but much more powerful
Good for social media, shops, dashboards
Real-World Examples
Website Type	Example	Why It's That Type
Static	A simple personal portfolio	Same text and images for every visitor. Nothing changes.
Static	A restaurant menu page	Shows the same dishes to everyone. Updated manually by the owner.
Dynamic	YouTube	Your home page shows videos based on your watch history. Different for every user.
Dynamic	Amazon	Shows your previous orders, recommended products, logged-in name. All personal data from a database.
Dynamic	Instagram	Your feed shows posts from people you follow. Completely unique to you.
💡
Which Will You Build First?
As a beginner, you will start with
static websites
— this is how every web developer starts. You will learn HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to build pages that look great but do not yet connect to a database. Dynamic websites come later once you learn server-side programming.

📘
Advanced: Server-Side vs Client-Side Rendering
Dynamic websites can generate content on the server before sending it (server-side rendering) or generate it in the browser after loading (client-side rendering). The differences between these approaches — and frameworks like React, Next.js, and others — will be explained in future advanced lessons.

Every browser comes with a powerful set of built-in tools called Developer Tools (often called "DevTools"). These let you look inside any website and see the actual code that makes it work. As a web developer, DevTools will become one of your most important tools.

⌨️
How to Open Developer Tools
On any website: press F12 on your keyboard, or right-click anywhere on the page and choose
"Inspect"
. A panel will appear showing the code behind the page.

What DevTools Shows You
Elements
Console
Network
Sources
Application
<!-- Elements panel: shows the HTML structure of the current page -->
<html>
  <head>
    <title>My Website</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 class="hero-title">Welcome!</h1>
    <p id="intro">This is the intro text.</p>
    <button onclick="doSomething()">Click</button>
  </body>
</html>
DevTools — What Each Panel Does
DevTools Panels — Overview
Elements → See and edit the HTML + CSS of the current page
Console → Run JavaScript directly and see error messages
Network → See every file the browser loaded and how long each took
Sources → Browse all the code files loaded for this page
Application → See cookies, local storage, and other saved data

✓ Press F12 on any webpage to open DevTools now
What You Can Do With DevTools
Click any element on a page and see its exact HTML and CSS
Temporarily change colours, text, or layout — just on your screen, without affecting the real website
See every file the browser loaded (HTML, CSS, JS, images) in the Network tab
Find and read error messages when something goes wrong
Test how the website looks on a phone screen using the mobile simulator
⚠️
You Cannot Break or Hack Websites With DevTools
Any changes you make in DevTools only affect
your own browser's view
. The real website on the server is unchanged. When you refresh the page, everything goes back to normal. DevTools is a viewing and testing tool, not a hacking tool.

🔍
Try It Now
Open any website — right-click on any text or image on this page — and choose
Inspect
. You will see the HTML code for exactly that element highlighted in the Elements panel. This is how all web developers learn — by exploring real websites!

Term	Definition
URL	Uniform Resource Locator — the unique address of a specific page or resource on the Web.
Protocol	The first part of a URL (http:// or https://) — the rules used to transfer data between browser and server.
Domain	The human-readable name of a website (e.g. wikipedia.org). Registered and owned by the site.
Path	The part of a URL after the domain that identifies a specific page or file on the server.
Query String	Parameters added to a URL after a ? symbol to pass extra information to the server (e.g. ?q=search).
HTTP Request	A message sent from the browser to the server asking for a specific page or resource.
HTTP Response	The message sent back from the server containing a status code and the requested file(s).
Status Code	A number in the HTTP response telling the browser whether the request succeeded (200, 404, 500, etc.).
GET	The most common HTTP method — used to request (fetch) a page or resource from the server.
HTML	HyperText Markup Language — the code that defines the structure and content of a web page.
CSS	Cascading Style Sheets — the code that controls the visual design and layout of a web page.
JavaScript	A programming language that makes web pages interactive and dynamic.
Static Website	A website where all pages are fixed files — every visitor sees the same content.
Dynamic Website	A website where content is generated on-demand based on user data, often using a database.
Developer Tools	Built-in browser tools (opened with F12) that let developers inspect, test, and debug web pages.
Render	The process of the browser converting HTML, CSS, and JS code into the visual page you see.
URL
Every page has a unique address. A URL is made of: protocol + domain + path + query string. HTTPS = secure connection.
HTTP Request
A message your browser sends to a server asking for a page. Includes method (GET), the URL, and headers.
HTTP Response
The server's reply containing a status code (200 = OK, 404 = not found) and the page files.
Website Loading
Type URL → DNS lookup → TCP connect → GET request → server responds → browser parses HTML → loads CSS/JS → renders page.
HTML / CSS / JS
HTML = structure. CSS = appearance. JavaScript = behaviour. All three together make a complete, interactive web page.
Static vs Dynamic
Static = same content for everyone (portfolios, menus). Dynamic = personalised content from a database (YouTube, Instagram).
DevTools
Press F12 in any browser to inspect HTML, CSS, network requests, and JavaScript on any website. Essential tool for every developer.
🎯
What You Learned Today
You now understand the full picture of how the Web works at a technical level. Every website is a collection of files (HTML, CSS, JS) stored on a server. Your browser fetches them via HTTP requests, receives responses, and renders the visual page you see. URLs are structured addresses. DevTools lets you peek inside any website and start understanding how it was built. You are ready to start writing your own code.